<!-- lenovo-thinkpad-t430-archlinux -->
## Running Archlinux on the Lenovo Thinkpad T430

In sum, Archlinux is working beautifully. What follows is a rough run down of
my notes while installing, configuring, tuning and using Archlinux on the 
Lenovo Thinkpad T430.

### Specs
  * i7 3520M (Dual core, Four threads, 4M cache, 2.9GHz)
  * 14" 1600x900 display
  * Intel HD Graphics 4000, **no discrete graphics card**
  * 4GB memory
  * 128GB Crucial m4 2.5" (7mm) SSD (laptop came with a 320GB 7200rpm platter)
  * 9 cell 70++ battery
  * Intel Centrino Wireless-N 2200 (2x2 BGN)

### Software that I typically use

No desktop environment. Openbox/pytyle3/pager-multihead. Gkrellm. Konsole. 
Google Chrome. Vim. Konversation. Wicd.

### Battery life

On 66% brightness, about 8 hours seems to be the sweet spot for 
typical usage (web browsing and vim). 100% brightness seems to knock this down 
to the 5-6 hour range. I've only had the laptop for a couple of days, so these 
numbers are pretty rough and based somewhat on extrapolation.

I have all of the tweaks suggested by `powertop` enabled for the exception of 
SATA link power management (because I am using an SSD). This includes wifi, 
audio and usb power management.

I also have the `ondemand` CPU frequency governor enable, which is the default 
nowadays anyway. Changing governors (tested powersave, performance and 
conservative) works perfectly.

### Disable KMS when using the current Archlinux installer

The current default Archlinux installer uses an older kernel that doesn't 
include the updated drivers for Intel's HD 4000 graphics (and possibly wifi?), 
so KMS fails once it tries to load---which ends up borking the display. To get 
around this, add 'nomodeset' to the kernel boot parameters to disable KMS. 
You'll have to do this again on initial boot if you install the kernel that 
comes with the installer. Once an updated kernel is installed, this boot 
parameter is no longer needed since the driver for the Intel HD 4000 graphics
chipset is included. The available snapshot installers have an updated kernel, 
and therefore disabling KMS is unnecessary if you're using them.

### [Most of the current T420 wiki page is relevant](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Lenovo_ThinkPad_T420)

And by that I mean, most things *just work*. Wifi, graphics (with 
xf86-video-intel), CPU frequency scaling, screen brightness, keyboard 
backlight, and *excellent* two finger scrolling (out-of-the-box with 
xf86-input-synaptics, no configuration necessary despite what the T420 wiki 
article says).

### Thinkfan

I installed thinkfan and added the `thinkpad_acpi` kernel module to 
`MODULES` in `/etc/rc.conf`. I also added the `thinkfan` daemon to `DAEMONS` in
`/etc/rc.conf`. To allow `thinkfan` to control the fan, enable `fan_control` by 
creating `/etc/modprobe.d/thinkfan.conf` with:

```
options thinkpad_acpi fan_control=1
```

And this is my thinkfan `/etc/thinkfan.conf`:

```
sensor /sys/devices/virtual/thermal/thermal_zone0/temp

(0, 0, 40)
(1, 38, 43)
(2, 41, 50)
(3, 44, 54)
(4, 51, 63)
(5, 55, 67)
(7, 61, 32767)
```

The settings are tweaked (a little less aggressive) from 
[Thinkpad T420 thinkfan settings](http://www.jakubkotowski.com/2011/06/thinkpad-t420-thinkfan-settings.html). 
I've tested it with the utilities in the `cpuburn` package and it seems to 
work well. For me, the fan stays off when idle and kicks into its lowest 
settings on typical usage (web browsing and vim, for me).

Recall that I do not have discrete graphics (i.e., nvidia) and have an SSD, 
which both have impact temperature.

### acpid

This also worked out of the box with one small tweak. In 
`/etc/acpi/handler.sh`, I replaced

``` sh
ac_adapter)
    case "$2" in
        AC|ACAD|ADP0)
```

with

``` sh
ac_adapter)
    case "$2" in
        ACPI*|AC|ACAD|ADP0)
```

This was needed because `ac_adapter ACPI0003:00` are the first two arguments
used when the `ac_adapter` event is triggered.

### pm-utils

Works beautifully. Literally no problems.

### laptop-mode-tools

I don't use it. acpid, pm-utils and powertop's recommended tweaks are enough 
for me. (I use acpid to raise and lower the brightness when the AC adapter is 
[un]plugged, and make sure that on wakeup/boot, the brightness is set 
appropriately.)

### Sleep button

For whatever reason I haven't been able to discover, I cannot detect any power 
button presses (neither through `acpi_listen` or `xev`). However, the T430 has 
an extra unlabeled button to the right of the "turn microphone on/off" button 
that shows up in xev as `XF86Launch1`. Thus, I put this in my `~/.xbindkeys`:

```
"sudo pm-suspend"
  XF86Launch1
```

And it's now a sleep button, as long as you set 'pm-suspend' to require no 
password using `visudo`. For example:

```
%wheel ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/sbin/pm-suspend
```

### Web cam

I installed `guvcview` and then ran it. It worked. (It looks like the 
`uvcvideo` kernel module is automatically loaded.)

### Audio/speakers

Alsa just works. Speakers sound good enough to me. (I'm no audiophile though, 
and have never been too picky over audio quality. My ears aren't very 
discerning.)

### What I Haven't tested

VGA. Mini display port. Mic. USB 3.0. mSATA. Memory card slot.

I don't anticipate any problems with these things, though.

### Conclusion

Archlinux works beautifully on this machine. I literally could not have 
imagined a smoother experience. I've installed Arch on several laptops, and 
this was by far the easiest. Having the wifi driver included in the kernel is 
an especially nice thing that I'm not used to. (Been a victim of broadcom for 
many years.) Also, the integrated graphics works beautifully, although I am not 
doing any compositing beyond xcompmgr transparency.

The laptop also has excellent ventilation and actually stays cool enough for it 
to be bearable to sit directly on my lap indefinitely. Even when the CPU is
chugging.

This laptop also comes with the option of adding nvidia via Optimus. I 
recommend staying away from this unless you're willing to deal with Bumblebee 
or absolutely need a dedicated graphics card. Early reviews seem to indicate 
that Intel's HD 4000 Graphics is quite excellent for integrated graphics, 
particularly compared to the available nvidia option for this laptop (NVIDIA 
NVS 5400M).

There is also a 1366x768 screen option, and based on preliminary reviews, it 
isn't that great. Go with the 1600x900 screen---it seems like the sweet spot.

Finally, this is my first Thinkpad. Incidentally, this is the first time that 
the T-series has had a "chiclet style" keyboard. Personally, I love it and have 
been partial to chiclet style keyboards in the past. The reviews already out 
there are not lying when they speak highly of its quality; it's on the 
best-feeling keyboards I've ever typed on.

With that said, it seems like most of the complaints revolve around the layout. 
The one bugger that has got me so far is the location of the 'fn' and 'control' 
keys. It feels like they should be swapped. `xev` actually picks up 'fn' key 
releases but not key presses. I was unsuccessful in swapping the keys using 
`xmodmap`, but perhaps there is a BIOS option somewhere that will allow a swap. 
This is my only complaint with the keyboard layout. (But remember, I was never 
used to the old layout!)

In sum, this appears to be a great laptop to run Linux on.

