<!-- writing-toml-type-checker-golang -->
## Writing a TOML type checker with Go

On February 23, 2013 at 7:05PM, the first draft of
[Tom's Obvious, Minimul Language (TOML) specification](https://github.com/mojombo/toml)
was published. According to the author,
[Tom Preston-Warner](https://github.com/mojombo),
TOML aims to be a minimal configuration file format that's easy to read due to 
obvious semantics.

Whatever the merits of such a project, the author's celebrity status provoked
a flurry of activity:
After two and a half hours, the
[first parser for TOML](https://github.com/mojombo/toml/commit/8eed1921d1261e332ca94cf81c30b87f2b1bdde0)
was published. 
After 24 hours, there were nearly 22 parsers spanning 10 languages.
Now, after 1 week, there are 44 parsers spanning 22 languages
including [my own contribution](https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml) and a 
[language agnostic test suite](https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml-test) with 
50+ tests.

The pace at which the specification has evolved is no less impressive.
Of particular note is the evolution of the type of an array.
When the spec was first introduced, arrays were homogeneous, **but** the type
of array was simply `array`. That is, the type of an array didn't depend on the 
type of the value it contained.

This leads to arrays like this being disallowed:

```ini
array = [1, 2, "not a number", 3]
```

but arrays like this being allowed:

```ini
array = [[1, 2, 3], ["not", "a", "number"]]
```

As someone who enjoys using strongly and staticly typed languages where the 
type of an array includes the type of the values it contains, I suggested that
[TOML should support fully homogeneous arrays](https://github.com/mojombo/toml/issues/28).
During the discussion, the idea of
[adding tuples](https://github.com/mojombo/toml/issues/131)
to TOML also came up.
Just recently,
[both of these suggestions were accepted](https://github.com/mojombo/toml/pull/154)
into the specification.


### A tuple interlude

As a quick reminder, a tuple can contain any number of elements but can be 
completely heterogeneous. Namely, the type of a tuple includes the types of all 
of its values, where order matters. Here's a few examples of valid tuples with
different types:

```
(1, 2) :: (Integer, Integer)
("a", 1) :: (String, Integer)
(1, "a") :: (Integer, String)
((1, "a"), (2.0, "b")) :: ((Integer, String), (Float, String))
(1.0, 2.0, true) :: (Float, Float, Bool)
```

Tuples can be used in fully homogeneous arrays to create well-typed 
structured data with mixed types:

```ini
# [(Integer, String)]
assoc = [(1, "a"), (2, "b"), (3, "c")]

# [(Integer, String, String)]
asl = [(26, "m", "Westborough"), (10, "f", "Boston")]

# [[(String, Float)]]
classrooms = [
  [ ("Janey", 4.0), ("Jeffrey", 3.9), ("Jill", 2.0) ],
  [ ("Bob", 1.0), ("Billy", 3.5), ("Brandon", 0.00001) ],
  [ ("Sarah", 2.8) ],
]
```

But tuples of different types cannot be in the same array:

```ini
invalid = [(1, "a"), ("b", 2)]
invalid2 = [(1, 2), (3, 4, 5)]
```


### Type checking

Now that we've established the semantics of arrays and tuples in TOML, we need 
some way of *enforcing* those semantics. In the first iteration of the TOML 
specification, checking types was easy since there were no composite types. 
Namely, the type of an array was simply `array`, so that if all values in any 
particular array had the same type, then the array was well-typed.

But now that arrays and tuples are defined in part by the types of their 
components, a bit more sophistication in our type checking wouldn't hurt.


### Defining type equality

The first step in creating a type checker is defining equality between two 
types. Is the type of `5` equal to the type of `10`? What about `10.0`?
The type of `5` and `10` is simply `Integer`, so they have equivalent types. 
But the type of `10.0` is `Float`, so it does not have the same type as `5` or 
`10`.

Equality among primitive types (types that don't have any component types) 
is easy: they are equal if and only if the name of the type is equal:

```go
func typeEqual(t1, t2 tomlType) bool {
    if t1.name() != t2.name() {
        return false
    }
    return true
}
```

In this function, we accept any two TOML types and return true if their names 
are equal. (I'll discuss how this works in Go in a little bit.)

But what about composite types? Certainly, for any two composite types to be 
equivalent, their *names* have to be equivalent. The logic we have in 
`typeEqual` so far is valid. But what about the types of their components? 
Arrays have a single component type, while tuples can have any number of 
component types. One reasonable way to compare such types is to compare the
types of their components:

```go
func typeEqual(t1, t2 tomlType) bool {
    // This is from our previous typeEqual
    if t1.name() != t2.name() {
        return false
    }

    // Check that each type has the same number of
    // components, and the types of each corresponding
    // component type are equivalent.
    cs1, cs2 := t1.components(), t2.components()
    if len(cs1) != len(cs2) {
        return false
    }
    for i := 0; i < len(cs1); i++ {
        if !typeEqual(cs1[i], cs2[i]) {
            return false
        }
    }
    return true
}
```

This will distinguish between types `[Integer]` and `[Float]`, and will 
also distinguish between types `(Int, String)` and `(Int, String, String)`.
As a bonus, since our definition of equality is recursive, `typeEqual` 
automatically works with any combination of array and tuple types.


### The Go types

So far, the only Go code I've shown you is `typeEqual`, which I said expected 
*any* two TOML types. But each TOML type has different Go representations:

```go
// A TOML base type is just a string of the type name.
type tomlBaseType string

// A TOML array type contains a single component type 'of'.
type tomlArrayType struct {
    of tomlType
}

// A TOML tuple type contains any number of component types 'of'.
type tomlTupleType struct {
    of []tomlType
}
```

How do we reconcile them? If we think about types as a set of operations, 
then we can use a Go interface:

```go
type tomlType interface {
    name() string
    components() []tomlType
}
```

So that every TOML type represented in Go has to implement a `name` and 
`components` method. A base or primitive type will always return zero component 
types, an array type will return one component type and a tuple will return 
zero or more component types:

```go
func (btype tomlBaseType) components() []tomlType {
    return nil
}

func (atype tomlArrayType) components() []tomlType {
    return []tomlType{atype.of}
}

func (ttype tomlTupleType) components() []tomlType {
    return ttype.of
}
```

Now we have everything we need for `typeEqual` to work. Right?

Not quite. We aren't out of the dog house yet.


### The empty list

There's still one case remaining: what is the type of the empty list, `[]`? 
It has no values, so there is nothing we can use to infer its type as any of 
the previously mentioned TOML types.
What if we gave `[]` its own special type? Then something like this wouldn't be 
allowed in TOML:

```ini
data = [[1, 2, 3], [], [4, 5, 6]]
```

Since the type of `[]` would be distinct from the type of `[Integer]`.

Instead of giving `[]` its own type, we can make it polymorphic! And for the 
purposes of TOML, we can adopt a simplistic definition of a polymorphic type: a 
type that is equal to any other type. This allows for the following to be valid 
TOML:

```ini
emptiness = []
data = [[1, 2, 3], [], [4, 5, 6]]
```

But how do we incorporate it into our definition of type equality? Easy. If one 
of the types we're comparing is polymorphic, then we say that the two types are 
equivalent:

```go
func typeEqual(t1, t2 tomlType) bool {
    if t1.polymorphic() || t2.polymorphic() {
        return true
    }
    if t1.name() != t2.name() {
        return false
    }

    cs1, cs2 := t1.components(), t2.components()
    if len(cs1) != len(cs2) {
        return false
    }
    for i := 0; i < len(cs1); i++ {
        if !typeEqual(cs1[i], cs2[i]) {
            return false
        }
    }
    return true
}
```

And this requires one last modification to our `tomlType` interface:

```go
type tomlType interface {
    name() string
    components() []tomlType
    polymorphic() bool
}
```

And a new polymorphic type represented in Go as an empty struct:

```go
type tomlPolymorphicType struct{}
```

Where we define the method `polymorphic` to be the constant `false` function 
for all types except `tomlPolymorphicType`, in which is it the constant `true` 
function.


### Wrap up

All of the code discussed in this article can be found on Github in
[toml/type-check.go](https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml/blob/master/type-check.go).

Bonus feature: use my
[TOML validator](https://github.com/BurntSushi/toml/tree/master/tomlv)
on any TOML file to print the types of every key in the file:

```bash
$ cat > test.toml <<EOF
> emptiness = []
> data = [[(1, "a"), (2, "b")], [], [(25, "y"), (26, "z")]]
> EOF
$ tomlv -types test.toml
data       [[(Integer, String)]]
emptiness  [a]
```

And it will bleat if you try to construct a value with an invalid type:

```bash
$ cat > bad.toml <<EOF
> data = [(1, "a"), [], (2, "b")]
> EOF
$ tomlv -types bad.toml
Error in 'bad.toml': Near line 1, key 'data': Array contains values of type 
'(Integer, String)' and '[a]', but arrays must be homogeneous.
```

