<!-- rust-regex-syntax-extensions -->
## Syntax extensions and regular expressions for Rust

A few weeks ago, I set out to add regular expressions to the
[Rust](http://www.rust-lang.org/)
distribution with an implementation and feature set heavily inspired by
[Russ Cox's RE2](http://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/).
It was just recently added to the
[Rust distribution](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/regex/index.html).

This regex crate includes a syntax extension that compiles a regular expression 
to native Rust code *when a Rust program is compiled*. This can be thought of 
as "ahead of time" compilation or
something similar to [compile time function 
execution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compile_time_function_execution).
These special natively compiled regexes have the *same exact* API as regular 
expressions compiled at runtime.

In this article, I will outline my implementation strategy---including code 
samples on how to write a Rust syntax extension---and describe how I was able 
to achieve an identical API between regexes compiled at compile time and 
regexes compiled at runtime.


### Brief notes on format

All code samples in this post compile with `rustc` from commit `6d8342f` 
(compiled on `2014-06-14, 17:51:49+0`). 
Code samples with an `// Output:` comment are tested before uploaded.

Most code samples *should* correspond to a complete program that is
compilable. This makes samples a bit longer than they need to be, but I think 
it's important to include complete working examples for a language still in 
development and not (yet) widely known.

Note that Rust is still under heavy development. I will do my best to keep this 
article updated with any breaking changes.


### How a regex matcher works

There are many different ways to implement a regular expression engine, so I 
will just briefly outline how mine works, which should closely correspond to 
RE2.

First, a regular expression is parsed and converted into an abstract syntax 
tree. For example, the regex `a|b` might be represented as 
`Alternate(Literal(a), Literal(b))`, which signifies "match either `a` or `b`."
Second, the regex's abstract syntax is converted to a sequence of 
instructions. This sequence of instructions can then be evaluated by a
[virtual machine](http://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/regexp2.html)
which will determine if a regex matches some text (and where it matches).

For the regex `a|b`, the sequence of instructions looks something like:

* 1: Split(2, 4)
* 2: Char(a)
* 3: Jump(5)
* 4: Char(b)
* 5: Match

In this case, `Split` means "jump to two different instructions 
simultaneously." In particular, if *either* branch executes the `Match` 
instruction, then the entire regex will match. If both `Char` instructions 
fail, then it's impossible to reach the `Match` instruction.


### Clarifying the divide: native regexes vs. dynamic regexes

The word "compiled" is heavily overloaded, so it's worth making sure that we 
get our terms straight. For example, in Python, you can *compile* a regular 
expression with `re.compile("...")`, which is done at runtime, and converts the 
pattern given into a data structure that is fed into a matching algorithm.
Often, it is good practice to compile a regular expression outside of loops 
so that it doesn't have to go through the overhead of compilation each time the 
expression is used to search text. (Assuming you don't want to rely on Python's 
caching.)

This is emphatically *not* what I mean by compiling regexes "ahead of time." 
What I mean is the more literal translation: a regular expression is converted 
to native Rust code when you compile your Rust program. That is, there is 
(virtually) zero cost of compiling a regex during runtime. Perhaps more 
importantly, because it's compiled to native Rust code, your regex will always 
run faster. (I promise evidence of this claim with benchmarks toward the end of 
this article.)

Let's clarify with an example. First, we can try compiling a regular expression 
at runtime:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="intro.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

Notice that we call `Regex::new` to create a regex, and the call may fail if 
the expression given isn't a valid regex. I call this a *dynamic* regex 
because the regular expression compilation happens at runtime. This example is 
analogous to Python's `re.compile`.

When a regular expression is compiled *dynamically*, it is converted to a 
sequence of instructions that are
[executed by a virtual machine](http://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/regexp2.html).
This virtual machine can execute **any** valid regular expression expressed as 
a sequence of instructions.

In contrast, I've called regexes that are compiled to Rust code when your Rust 
program compiles *native*. A native regex is indistinguishable from a dynamic 
regex, except that it must be created with a `regex!` macro:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="intro-aot.rs"
  data-gist-highlight-line="1,3,6"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

The highlighted lines indicate a change from the previous code sample.

(Note about Rust: Syntax extensions require a special compiler 
directive `#[phase(plugin)]` to work. The `phase` directive must be enabled 
explicitly: `#![feature(phase)]`.)

Notice that we no longer have to check if `regex!` returns an error because 
all errors are converted to *compile time* errors. For example, the following 
program will fail to compile:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="unbalanced-paren.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

The error given by `rustc`: `Regex syntax error near position 3: Unclosed 
parenthesis.`

So what exactly does `regex!` expand to if not a sequence of instructions?
Well, remember the virtual machine I mentioned earlier that can execute a 
sequence of instructions? That's precisely what `regex!` gets replaced with, 
except it's *specialized* to the particular sequence of instructions 
corresponding to the regular expression given. This specialization allows us to 
perform optimizations such as removing heap allocation and embedding the 
instructions directly instead of relying on a generalized algorithm.

If you want an example, you can take a look at how
[this 
program](https://gist.githubusercontent.com/BurntSushi/11161035/raw/unexpanded.rs)
expands the `regex!` macro into
[this 
program](https://gist.githubusercontent.com/BurntSushi/11161035/raw/expanded.rs).
(It's not important to understand the expanded code, but it is notable that it 
expands to a lot of code! If you have a lot of `regex!` calls in your program, 
then you might see your binary size increase. But compiling with `-O` 
optimization will help with that.)

Native regexes are pretty good. They provide extra safety (cannot compile a 
program with an invalid regex) and extra performance. They do come with a 
downside though: code bloat. If your program has a lot of `regex!` calls 
(hundreds) and is compiled unoptimized, then you'll notice a bigger binary. 
However, optimization can help shrink them back down.


### Related work

Note that I am not the first to do this.
[D has ctRegex](http://dlang.org/phobos/std_regex.html#.ctRegex) which claims 
to do something similar.
There is also
[xpressive](http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_41_0/doc/html/xpressive/user_s_guide.html) 
in Boost, but native regexes must be written with template syntax.
Finally, there is also
[CL-PPCRE](http://weitz.de/cl-ppcre/) for Common Lisp which also claims to have 
native regexes.

[Nimrod](http://nimrod-lang.org/) seems like it is capable of producing native 
regexes, but I don't think it has been done yet.

A related project is
[Ragel](http://www.complang.org/ragel/),
which can compile state machines to native code in a variety of languages.
In principle, Ragel is also producing native regexes, but my approach is 
automated by the Rust compiler and provides an API identical to that of
dynamic regexes.

(Please alert me if I've missed anything.)


### Native regexes are implemented with macros

Rust has
[hygienic macros](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hygienic_macro),
but they can be written in one of two ways.
The first way is to use `macro_rules!` to conveniently specify some source 
transformation with quasiquoting.
For example, here is how the `try!` macro is defined, which provides an easy 
way to return early in a function that returns a value with type `Result<T, 
E>`:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="try.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

Notice the use of quasiquoting with `$e`. The expression `$e` is spliced into 
the `match` expression *at compile time*. The quasiquoting in this case 
distinguishes between something that parameterizes the macro at compile time 
and the actual source code being written.

In general, if a macro can be written with `macro_rules!`, then it *should* be 
written with `macro_rules!` because they are simple to write. However, they
are not powerful enough to implement native regexes because they are restricted
to source code transformations. To implement native regexes, we need to 
actually compile a regular expression during the compilation of a Rust program.

Luckily, the second way to write a macro is via a syntax extension (also known 
as a "procedural macro"). This is done by a compile time hook that lets you 
execute arbitrary Rust code, rewrite the abstract syntax to whatever you want 
and opens up access to the Rust compiler's parser. In short, you get a lot of 
power. And it's enough to implement native regexes. The obvious drawback is 
that they are more difficult to implement.

Note that *all* macros are invoked with the `name!` syntax, regardless of 
whether they are defined with `macro_rules!` or as a syntax extension.


### Setting up a syntax extension

Syntax extensions only became available to user programs a few months ago.
Before that, they were only available to the Rust compiler.
Thus, there is little documentation, so I've learned what I know by example and 
by examining the
[syntax](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/index.html)
crate, which defines Rust's abstract syntax, provides a parser and the syntax 
extension functionality itself. (Note that syntax extensions are currently an 
experimental feature of Rust.)

Since there is a fair bit of boiler plate required, let's take a look at 
implementing a trivial macro that returns the factorial of `5`:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="lib-factorial_no_quote.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

(N.B. There are some comments in the code above that explain some details.)

The magic happens with the `macro_registrar` function, which must be exported 
and labelled with the special `#[macro_registrar]` attribute. This function is 
where the compiler lets you register syntax extensions, which have a name and 
provide a value of type `SyntaxExtension` which indicates the sort of expansion 
that you intend to do. In this case, we're using `NormalTT`, which is a 
function-like macro, but there
[are 
others](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/base/enum.SyntaxExtension.html),
including the `macro_rules!` form.

Here, we register a single macro: `factorial`, which is *expanded* by the 
`expand` function. The type of `expand` is specified by the `NormalTT` 
expansion, which gives us an
[extension 
context](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/base/struct.ExtCtxt.html) 
(e.g., the parsing state),
a 
[span](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/codemap/struct.Span.html) 
(e.g., a region of the actual code, used for error reporting)
and a
[token 
tree](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ast/enum.TokenTree.html).
But most importantly, the *return value* is a
[`Box<MacResult>`](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/base/trait.MacResult.html)
("macro result"), where `MacResult` is a trait.
Types that satisfy the `MacResult` trait can be automatically spliced into the 
AST of a Rust program.
In this case, we're just creating an expression, so we can use the
[MacExpr](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/base/struct.MacExpr.html) 
helper type to construct a value that has type `Box<MacResult>`. Finally, we 
see that `MacExpr::new` has type `Gc<Expr> -> Box<MacResult>`. Ah ha! So if we 
can build an expression, then we can build a `Box<MacResult>`, and therefore be 
done with our macro expansion.

The body of the `expand` function shows how to manually create an expression 
with a single integer literal. Even though the expression is very simple, I 
wrote two helper functions `uint_literal` and `dummy_expr` to encapsulate some 
of the more mundane details. If we have to go through this much work for just a 
single literal, you might imagine that it gets very tedious pretty quickly.

But remember the quasiquoting that was available to use when defining macros 
with `macro_rules!`? They are available to us here too, courtesy of the
[`syntax::ext::quote`](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/quote/index.html) 
module. Here's the same syntax extension implemented using quasiquoting:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="lib-factorial.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

The `quote_expr!` macro does all the heavy lifting for us. It splices the 
value of `answer` into an expression for us, handling all the nitty-gritty 
details automatically. (We could also write, say, `$answer + 1` which would 
produce an expression with an addition operation. The `$answer` part is 
computed at compile time and the addition operation would be done at 
runtime---if it isn't optimized away.) Fundamentally, the 
quasiquoting works the same here as it does with `macro_rules!`.

(There is some
[middle 
ground](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/build/trait.AstBuilder.html)
between building the AST manually and using 
quasiquoting, but I won't cover it here.)

And finally, we can actually *use* it with:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="factorial.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

The comments in the code explain some of the extra compiler directives we have 
to write in order to import a syntax extension. (Note that this is no different 
than importing the `log` crate from the Rust distribution, except that the 
`log` crate requires `#[phase(syntax, link)]` because it provides more stuff 
than just a syntax extension.)

### Accessing the parser

The above example demonstrates how to write a really simple---but pretty 
useless---syntax extension. To write a useful syntax extension, we probably 
need to define a macro that can accept arguments. With `macro_rules!`, this is 
really easy because there's some convenient syntax similar to defining a 
regular function. But in the land of syntax extensions, we must deal with 
Rust's parser directly.

An obvious extension to our `factorial!` macro is to let it take an integer 
argument so that we can compute any factorial. But how do we get the arguments
given to a macro defined as a syntax extension?

Well, if you look back at the last example, then you'll notice that the 
`expand` function has a few parameters that we didn't use. One of which is a 
sequence of token trees with type `&[ast::TokenTree]`. Luckily, a sequence of 
`ast::TokenTree` values can be used to build a parser with 
`new_parser_from_tts` defined in the
[syntax::parse](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/parse/index.html) 
module. With a parser, we can ask it for expressions---and once we have 
expressions, we can translate those to real Rust values. In this case, that's 
just going to be an integer.
(You can see the
[parser API 
here](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/parse/parser/struct.Parser.html),
and although it is largely undocumented, most of the names are reasonably 
descriptive.)

Let's take a look at the code. The principal changes from the last example are 
highlighted:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="lib-factorial_arg.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
  data-gist-highlight-line="999999999,20-25,33-63"
 ></code>

The first few changes are fairly trivial. This time, instead of hard-coding the 
factorial of `5`, we parse an unsigned integer literal and pass that to the 
`factorial` function. If a single unsigned integer literal could not be parsed, 
then we return a
"[dummy 
expression](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ext/base/struct.DummyResult.html#method.expr)".
The actual error is written to the parser state in `parse`. The code is 
structured this way to allow the compiler to continue even if an error is 
found.

The `parse` function shows how to create a parser from a sequence of token 
trees. A single expression is parsed, and we use pattern matching to make sure 
it corresponds to an unsigned integer literal.
(To figure out which value constructors to use in your patterns, you'll want to 
dig into the 
[ast::Expr](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/syntax/ast/struct.Expr.html) 
documentation, specifically the `Expr_` type.)

After we find a literal, we make sure it's the last thing in the sequence of 
token trees and then return the integer as a real Rust value with type `u64`.

If anything unexpected occurs, we log an error with the Rust compiler via the 
`ExtCtxt` and return `None`. As a bonus, we use the `syntax::print::pprust` 
module to pretty-print Rust expressions to make our error messages nicer.

Finally, the macro can be used the same way as last time, except we call 
`factorial!` with an integer argument:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="factorial_arg.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
  data-gist-highlight-line="5"
 ></code>

This concludes the tutorial aspect of this article. Now we'll get back to 
regexes.

### Creating the `regex!` syntax extension

Instead of going through the
[full code 
generator](https://github.com/mozilla/rust/blob/master/src/libregex_macros/lib.rs),
which would require more explanation about how the virtual machine works,
I'll explain the representation of native regexes and how some of the 
optimizations work.

But first, we must figure out how the `regex!` macro will be used. If possible, 
it should reuse the existing
[API for the Regex 
type](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/regex/struct.Regex.html).
The benefit of this is that native regexes won't introduce any additional 
complexity on top of dynamic regexes other than how they are constructed. The 
`regex!` macro should also probably return an expression, so that we can write 
things like `regex!("abc").is_match("xyz")`.

Perhaps we can construct a value with type `Regex`. If we could do that, then 
we'd be done---because such values already support all the convenient matching, 
splitting and replacing functions. So let's take a look at the representation 
of a dynamic `Regex`:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="rep-regex-dynamic.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
  data-gist-line="2-1000"
 ></code>

The representation shown here is very simple: it's just a sequence of 
instructions. The problem is that this representation is for *dynamic* 
regexes. Remember that dynamic regexes work by being compiled to a sequence of 
instructions that is then executed by a general virtual machine. The VM can be 
thought of as a Rust function with type
`fn(insts: &[Inst], search: &str) -> Captures`, where `Captures` is just the 
location of matches in the `search` text.

Native regexes on the other hand should be native Rust code with *precisely the 
same type* as above with one omission: the sequence of instructions. Why? 
Because the sequence of instructions is encoded directly into the function by 
the `regex!` syntax extension. Therefore, the type of a native regex VM would 
have to be `fn(search: &str) -> Captures`.

So we're left with an interesting set of constraints. On the one hand, we have 
a VM that can execute a sequence of instructions on search text, and on the 
other, we have a specialized VM that just executes on search text. Since a 
regex must be *either* dynamic or native, we can represent this state of 
affairs with a sum type:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="rep-regex-both.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
  data-gist-line="2-1000"
 ></code>

And now we can easily write a function that executes a `Regex` on search text, 
regardless of whether its dynamic or native:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="rep-regex-exec.rs"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
  data-gist-line="12-1000"
 ></code>

These details of the representation are hidden from well behaving clients, and 
therefore, dynamic and native regexes are indistinguishable.


### Why did you just say "well behaving clients"?

Shouldn't Rust's module system prevent clients from accessing parts of the 
representation that aren't exported?

Herein lay the dirty little secret of the `regex_macros` crate: it *must* 
be able to access the internal representation of a `Regex` (along with other 
things, like the set of all instructions). But if you look at the public API 
documentation, you'll not see any such details of the representation exposed.
This is because they are hidden using a special `#[doc(hidden)]` attribute,
but you can see that an
[entire module of 
things](https://github.com/mozilla/rust/blob/master/src/libregex/lib.rs#L395) 
is exported for the exclusive benefit of the `regex_macros` crate.

Therefore, the "well behaving clients" qualification is necessary. Misbehaving 
clients could
[access the internal representation of the Regex 
type](https://github.com/mozilla/rust/blob/master/src/libregex/re.rs#L103), and 
thereby distinguish between dynamic and native regexes.

(It'd be possible to ameliorate this somewhat by exposing a hidden constructor 
function.)


### Performance optimizations

This is still early days for the regex crate in Rust, but there are two primary 
optimizations made with native regexes. The first is removing heap allocation.
Briefly, the general VM for dynamic regexes has a few places where it needs to 
allocate things on the heap. Primarily, the allocation is for storing capture 
groups (i.e., the location of submatches in search text). The heap allocation 
is necessary because the dynamic VM doesn't know at compile time how many 
capture groups any particular regex might have.

This of course is not the case for native regexes, since the regex is compiled 
when your Rust program is compiled. Therefore, we can put all of the capture 
group information on the stack using explicitly sized vectors (i.e., `[T, 
..N]`). This removes all heap allocation (except for the return value).

The second optimization comes from encoding the instructions directly into one 
big `match` expression based on the *position* of the instruction. This removes 
a lot of small computations necessary to discover what the "next" instruction 
is.

Some other smaller optimizations were made, such as removing conditional 
branches based on flags set in a particular instruction (like case 
insensitivity, multi-line mode, etc.) or converting a binary search on a 
character class to a single `match` expression.


### Benchmarks

As promised, here are some benchmarks run on an Intel i3930K:

<code
  data-gist-id="11161035"
  data-gist-file="bench-cmp"
  data-gist-hide-footer="true"
  data-gist-hide-line-numbers="true"
 ></code>

Native regexes provide a universal speedup.

The more interesting observation is that native regexes drastically reduce 
constant factors associated with matching a particular regex against some text. 
This is evidenced by the `easy_32`, `easy1_32`, `medium_32` and `hard_32` 
benchmarks, where there is an order of magnitude improvement in almost all of 
them.

These benchmarks in particular test a few different regexes (based on 
particular optimizations related to literal prefixes) on 32 bytes of text.
As one might imagine, with such a small search string, constant factors are 
likely to dominate the performance of the matching algorithm.
Not surprisingly, native regexes win big here---likely because there is almost 
no heap allocation occurring.


### Future work

There are still many more optimizations that can be performed:

* Creating a "one pass" NFA where no backtracking need occur.
* Attempt to do state compression in the code generator via a more intelligent 
  analysis on the sequence of instructions.
* The big one: implement a DFA, similar to how RE2/C++ works.


### Acknowledgements

Many thanks to the following:

* [Steven Fackler](https://github.com/sfackler) for helping 
  me navigate the word of syntax extensions.
* [Eduard Burtescu](https://github.com/eddyb) for helping me with the code 
  generator and talking through some future ideas for optimization.
* [Chris Morgan](https://github.com/chris-morgan) for [giving me the initial 
  idea](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/42#issuecomment-40301587) to 
  create native regexes.
* [Alex Crichton](https://github.com/alexcrichton) for holding my hand through 
  the pull request process.
* [Russ Cox](http://swtch.com/~rsc/) for blazing the trail and writing 
  an **amazing** [series of articles](http://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp) on 
  implementing regular expression matching.


### Links

* [regex API 
  documentation](http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/regex/index.html).
* A [gist of all code samples](https://gist.github.com/BurntSushi/11161035) in 
  this article.
* Some rough numbers for the 
  [regex-dna](https://github.com/BurntSushi/regexp/tree/master/benchmark/regex-dna) 
  benchmark, compared with Go, Python and C.
* The
  [infrastructure used to compile, check and upload](https://github.com/BurntSushi/burntsushi-blog/tree/master/posts/gists/rust-regex-syntax-extensions)
  code samples in this article automatically.

### Other examples of syntax extensions

When documentation is scarce, the next best thing is to look at examples. Here 
are the ones I know about:

* [simple-ext](https://github.com/sfackler/syntax-ext-talk/blob/gh-pages/simple-ext/lib.rs)
  is an example of a syntax extension for sorting literal strings. You 
  can see it [used 
  here](https://github.com/sfackler/syntax-ext-talk/blob/gh-pages/simple-ext/test.rs).
* [hexfloat](https://github.com/mozilla/rust/blob/master/src/libhexfloat/lib.rs)
  for hexadecimal floating-point literals (part of Rust distribution).
* [fourcc](https://github.com/mozilla/rust/blob/master/src/libfourcc/lib.rs)
  four-character code library (part of Rust distribution).
* [rust-phf](https://github.com/sfackler/rust-phf) implements compile time 
  static maps.

Please ping me if you know of more examples. I'll add them here.

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://ajax.googleapis.com/ajax/libs/jquery/1.9.1/jquery.min.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="//cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/gist-embed/1.7/gist-embed.min.js"></script>

